---
layout: post
title:      "My path to data science"
date:       2021-03-25 15:18:48 +0000
permalink:  my_path_to_data_science
---


My hometown is Blue Bell, PA. I am the middle child of three boys in the family. Everyone is in my family is the math-y type. My mom is a middle school math teacher. My dad is a biostatistician. My older brother is a civil engineer, my younger brother as well as myself are Mechanical engineers.  I guess you could say I’ve always been destined to work in some STEM field. 

Anyway, I grew up always enjoy science and math.  When I went to college, I actually applied as a pre-med major before quickly switching to the engineering school.  While in college, I took a wide range of classes as I was never quite sure what field I’d end up in.  I took classes ranging from Sleep & Dreams & Altered States of Consciousness, to Mechanics of Flights, to Biomechanics, to a philosophy class that asks the question, what is the difference between our brains and computers?  In addition, I took two object-oriented programming classes – one in Python and one in Java.  These programming classes always stood out to me.  The programming assignments were like fun little puzzles, not like normal engineering problems or like writing a paper. Assignments were logical, and provided a sense of satisfaction that I never quite enjoyed in other areas I was studying. But alas, I was an engineering major and was not able to explore any further than introductory level courses.

After I graduated college, I took a job in Nuclear industry with Sargent & Lundy.  Our group worked primary on engineering modifications to be made at the PSE&G owned Salem 1 and 2, and Hope Creek Nuclear Generating stations.  While I did really enjoy learning about the reactor, the engineering itself felt antiquated.  I can remember a time when I was tasked to research a specific piece of equipment. This equipment in question had been installed back when the reactor first went online in the 1980s.  Back then, very little (to almost none) of the engineering had been documented on computers. Instead, drawings were mostly drawn by hand, and calculations likely on a type writer.  Some calculations had been scanned to PDF and loaded into their document record system, but not this one.  It was no where to be found.  So I was tasked with trying to find this equipment specification within reels of film that the plant keeps in a records room.  The reels are played back on this machine that magnifies each slide as you wind it through the machine.  Suffice it to say, I spent hours paging through these reels to no avail.  But, it’s not like the record keeping is the only thing that is antiquated (of course it’s updated now, they keep all their records electronically – the plant also runs on a computer now), the engineer also seemed antiquated.   The NRC guidelines are purposefully restrictive.  The public image Nuclear power is tarnished by a few freak, but devastating accidents (Trunoble, Fukishima,e tc..), the NRC is forced to make engineering guidelines so strict that they limit innovation.  Any engineering modification that we designed for the plant was something that had been tested a million times and usually had been implemented elsewhere. Essentially the job comes down to writing, in technical documentation, how what you are planning to do or to install, has been done before in similar situations.   The job, although important, felt mundane to me. I wasn’t doing anything truly new or inspiring.

A few months into my job a as a mechanical engineer, my boss came to me with an opportunity to do some field work.  Being a little bogged down with the engineering I was doing, I was excited to get outside.  The new role was working under a project manager for transmission projects.  This manager has a project inside and connected to the switchyard of Hope Creek Generating Station.  Naturally, they needed someone who was badged at the Nuclear plant, which made me a good choice.  Not quite knowing what the job entailed I started in April 2018, this group turned out to really be entirely a project management group. We produced no engineering documenation whatsoever, and the experience would not count towards a PE. Instead, we managed project schedule, cost, we managed the contractors, the permits, and were the go-to people for anything project related.  If something was in the way, it was our job to find a solution, or find the right people to find a solution.  I was assigned a project which I managed largely on my own (in parallel with a larger project the Sr. PM was working on).  While working there I learned a ton about transmission and substation projects from permitting to engineering to construction to legal disputes. But the thing is, it was a very non-technical role. I spent most of the time in meetings and tracking / following up on other people’s action items. 

So, back in 2019, I met my girlfriend. She’s super bright of course and was working on a data science master’s degree. Once she graduated in Spring 2020, she stared her first job.  Being at home during the pandemic, we spent many of our days working together. And, since she had started in July 2020, she had never been into the office or properly been onboarded with her company.  As a result, she had a ton of questions about coding.  Who was the easiest person to ask? Me.  At first I was hesitant that I was going to be able to help at all, but I gave it a shot.  We worked through her problems together and it got me thinking about the classes I had taken in college.  I was enjoying the help I was giving her, and I had never even really studied data science at all.  Knowing that I was in a bit of a rut with my career path she suggested that I look into data science programs.  I started taking an online course in python just to refresh my memory a bit. It was fun, just like I remembered. So, after a bit of deliberating, I eventually quite my job and decided to take this head on.

I am hoping that data science is going to be as rewarding as the programming in college felt.  I really enjoyed the module 1 project and looking for insights. It gives me a sense of satisfaction that I never felt when completing a deliverable within the engineering world.  I am really excited to continue expanding my skill set.  Eventually I’d love to combine these skills with my passion for the ocean and work predicting ocean conditions or something related. Stay tuned.

